>> Kyle Simpson: Okay, so
if a function is not pure for
any of a variety of reasons,
what are our options?
One option, the obvious one is leave it
impure and that's just how it is, right?
It's got a right to the database.
There's no way around it.
Database rights are an impurity.
They are a side effect.
They have to happen in our apps,
there's no way to get around that.
We can certainly be obvious about it.
We can name that function so
that it is clear,
actually we can name that procedure, so
that it is clear that it's gonna do
something like write to the database.
We can even put a comment there like,
there be dragons,
side effects beware, right?
We can put them in a file
called side effects.js.
We can be obvious about our side effects,
and we said earlier the reason for
being obvious is so that we make
it easier to maintain this code.
>> Kyle Simpson: But we do want to
reduce them as much as possible.
And one of the key techniques for
doing that is to take a function that
may have a side effect in it, and ask,
is there some way for me to rearrange
the way this function works, and
extract out the impurity,
leaving just a pure function in place?
That does not mean to remove
that impure functionality.
I do not mean to take that out of the app.
You have to write to the database or
whatever.
What I mean is it doesn't
have to belong right there.
If I have this set of code that's doing
a very important set of computations
on some kind of inputs, and
then it's gonna write it to the database.
The functional programmer says, well,
that could be two separate entities.
That could be a function that
does all the computation, and
it could be a procedure that
does the single side effect.
So what we're talking about
is to extract the impurity,
to bring it to the edge,
to bring it to the outer shell.
That is one way of making
side effects more obvious.
Instead of hiding it inside of the
definition of this thing that looks like
a function but it's actually a procedure,
we bring it to the surface.
And we make it more obvious.
Example, here's an add comment,
which is going to construct an object and
put some values into it and
then it's going to append it to the DOM.
It's an impure function, right?
That is line 11 is an impure function call
because we create a side effect with it,
which is that we modify the state
of the DOM in the page.
But there are some interesting and
useful stuff happening here that
is separate from the side effects.
Matter of fact, not only is there
the side effect of adding to the DOM, but
you might not have spotted this side
effect line three generating a unique ID.
That's also a side effect.
So, is it possible for
me to extract out the impurity and
make that be at the edge, make it be
on the shell, and not be obvious?
Sure it is.
How about if we change this
code to look like that?
We now have a,
not procedure called addComment, but
a function called newComment, whose only
job is to make a new comment object.
>> Kyle Simpson: But you'll notice
now that it receives the commentID as
an input.
We take commentID,
the unique ID generation, and
we pass it in as an argument.
And then instead of mutating the DOM
inside of newComment we return back
the DOM element.
We return back the thing
that is the DOM element and
elsewhere we do the appending to the DOM.
Now that doesn't get
rid of the side effect,
it just extracts it to leave
pure function wherever possible.
That's what a functional programmer
means by making pure functions and
then having side effects
on the outer shell.
Wherever possible look for an opportunity
to extract out the impurity,
leaving a pure function in place.
That will not always be practical.
It will not always be
practical to do that, but
wherever possible this is better than
leaving something as an impure function.